--- Page 1 ---
 

DOMASI COLLEGE OF EDUCATION

STUDENT INFORMATION HANDBOOK

 

RULES, REGULATIONS AND CODE OF CONDUCT

AUGUST, 2024


--- Page 2 ---
TABLE OF CONTENTS

 

CRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS....

DEFINITIONS ......cscssssessssesessesessssessssesessesessesesessesessesesseseseeseseeseseseeseseesesesseseseeauseeseseseeaeaeeaeeaseseeeeaueseseseeaeseseuseeseateseanseegeats 5
SECTION 1......cssssssssssssssssssncssscscsesscsesssscsessssesesscsesenenssucsessssenesessenesussesesscsenussesesssseaesucsessesenesessesesseseneseessncsscseseneneses 6
PREAMBLE .........ccssesssssssssssesesseseseesesesneseseessseeseseeseseseeaeseeseseeseseeseneseeseseesesueseseseesuseeseseceaeacesesceseaeeneseesuseseaaesesanseeseatensanseegeate 6
REGISTRATION, ORIENTATION AND FEES ......cscsssssssssesessssesessesessesessesesesseseseeeeseeneseseeseenenensescneeessesaeauseeanaecaeanseeass 10
SECTION 3....ecsssssssssssssesesssscsesscsesesscscsssncsescsenesnesesssenesssesesnenesessenesussesesucsenesuesessesenesessesesuenesesecsenseusneneesensecseneseeees 13

GENERAL INSTITUTIONAL DRESS AND OUTLOOK ...
CHAPLAINCY AND RELIGIOUS WORSHIP

 
 

 
 

SECTION 5.....cscssssssssssssssssssssssssssssssssescsssesesssesescsesesesesessenseseesssssssesesesesesescsesesencseaecuseasensecssseacaesessacsessseseesseseecenonees 15
COLLEGE FACILITIES ...

SECTION 6...

STUDENT SERVICES .....cccsssssessssseseseseseseseseseseseeeeessesesesesesenesesesesenesesesesasesceeeseseseseseseneseneseseseeesseeeeeseseseaeseaeaeseaeseseseeeeneees 22
SECTION 7.....csssssssssssssssssssssssssssssssssssscssscscsssesescsesesssesessensesssnsnsssssnenssssesesssesescsesescsesseseessessesssssssacessesessesacsseseenees 25

STUDENT SUPPORT SERVICES...
SECTION 8

 
 

INSTITUTIONAL POLICIES .......cccccsesssesessseseseesesessesessseseseseseseseseseseseseseseeeesesseseseseseseseseseseneseeeaeceseseseseseseaeseneneseneaeees 27
SECTION 9.....ccscsssssssssssssssssssssssnssssssesscssnsscsseescecsesssssesesssessssssessssssssssssssesssesesssssesesesesssesesssssesssssssacesssasssssecsneseenees 36

CODE OF CONDUCT AND STUDENT BEHAVIOUR..
SECTION 10

 
 

STUDENT'S DISCIPLINARY COMMITTEE........cccscsssssssssesesssssssssseseseseseseseseseseseseseseseseeesseseseseseaesesesuseseaeseneseeeneeseenees 43
SECTION 11 ...c.cscscsessscssssssssssssssssssssssssssssscssssssssscsssssssesssssesesesessssssessssssssssssescsssssesssesesssesesesssesssssesasesssasssssesssessseees 46

GENERAL ACADEMIC RULES AND REGULATIONG....
SECTION 12

 
 

CONDITIONS FOR WITHDRAWAL OTHER THAN ACADEMIC AND MISCONDUCT AND THE RE-
ADMISSION PROCESS. .....cccsssssssssssesssssssssesessesessesensesesessenensencaessenssesesesessscensseeaeseeneasaseaesneaeasensaesseseneaeseeeeseeseaseneansneass 52
SECTION 13 ......cccssscsesssssscsessssscssssesescssssssesessssssesessssesesesssesessssesesesessesesessssesesessssssseseseeeseesescenssesseussessaseusesssasensoess 54

STUDENT REPRESENTATIVE COUCIL AND SOCIETIES ....
SECTION 14

 
 

EXTRA-CURRICULAR ACTIVITIES .......ccscsssssssssessssesessesessssesessensssenesseseseeeseseeseseeneaeeseaeseeseasensaesneseseeneseeaesesseasensansnsass 57


--- Page 3 ---
FOREWORD

Dear Students,

Welcome to Domasi College of Education (DCE), one of the reputable institutions that train Secondary
School teachers in Malawi. DCE strives to provide its students with a stimulating environment for
academic growth and personal development, quality resources, and an up-to-date curriculum. All these
are designed to help you gain the relevant skills and experience to realize your potential and contribute
to the development of our nation.

We have provided this revised handbook to serve as a reference guide while you pursue your degree
programme here at DCE. The revised handbook will provide you an introduction to the College and
offer a guide to pertinent policies, processes, and procedures that relate to your academic and social life
as a student. The handbook also provides a listing of support services available to all students at the
College. It is therefore important for you to take time to read and familiarise yourself to this handbook.
Please note that rules and penalties will not be exempted just because someone is unaware or ignorant
of specific rules and procedures.

This DCE revised student handbook takes cognizance of emerging issues impacting student
participation in higher education in Malawi.

Thank you for choosing Domasi College of Education. I wish you a fruitful and productive time at DCE!

Dr. A. M. Yambeni
Principal


--- Page 4 ---
CRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS

The acronyms and abbreviations provided herein are only applicable to this document.

Aids : Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome

CCAPSO : Students Christian Organisation

HIV : Human Immunodeficiency Virus

DCE : Domasi College of Education

DCE SRC : Domasi College of Education Students’ Representative Council
SCOM : Student Christian Organisation of Malawi


--- Page 5 ---
DEFINITIONS

Definitions’ provided herein are only applicable to this document.

Bullying: Use of superior strength to influence someone in a negative way.

Campus: Campus of Domasi College of Education.

College: Domasi College of Education.

Controlled Substance: Drugs or chemicals whose manufacturing, possession and use are regulated by
the law.

Cyber Bullying: the use of electronic communication to bully a person.

SRC: Student Representative Council is the students governing body.

Defamation: Communication of a false statement about a person to a third party where the statement
has the effect of lowering the public reputation of the former or causing him or her to be shunned and
avoided by others.

Hall of residence: College-owned accommodation.

Harassment: Includes unwelcome conduct whether verbal, physical, visual, based on a person’s race,
colour, sex, national origin, religion, disability, age or any other basis prohibited by law; which has the
effect of interfering unreasonably with that person’s work or academic performance, or creating an
intimidating, offensive, or hostile environment.

Intimidation: unlawful act of intentionally coercing or frustrating somebody such as forcing someone to
do something against his or her will or by violence, or such as forcing somebody to be absent from
classes or other activities.

Minor: Any person whose age is below 18.

Orientation period: This is the period in which academic and administrative staff members brief all
students on the various courses offered which with subject combinations, the facilities and services that
are offered by the Department, Faculty, School, College and the College.

Publication: The distribution of texts or images through any medium, including paper, and the placing
of content on public notice boards or website, or in a magazine, newsletter and any like item in order to
make the content publicly known.

Sexual harassment: This includes but not limited to : unwelcome or unwanted sexual advances,
requests for sexual favours, and other verbal, physical, or visual conduct of a sexual nature when
submission to such conduct is made, explicitly or implicitly, a term or condition of the education,
academic evaluation, or other participation in the College community by a member of that community;
or such conduct has the purpose or effect of unreasonable interference with work or academic
performance or creates an intimidating, hostile, or offensive work or academic environment.

Student: A registered Student of Domasi College of Education.

Warden: A person mandated to oversee activities of students in Halls of Residence.

Withdraw: Leaving the College and losing the privilege of being a registered student either temporarily
(for a certain period of time) or permanently.


--- Page 6 ---
SECTION 1
PREAMBLE
1.1 Introduction

Domasi College of Education (DCE) endeavors to adhere to policies of the three thematic areas of the
Ministry of Education, which are: access and equity; quality and relevance; as well as governance and
management. This necessitates development of various policies in the College to reflect the broad policy
thematic areas highlighted above. The College policies include Registration policy, Assessment Policy,
HIV and AIDS policy, Gender policy, and Transport Policy.

Every registered student who has been admitted to DCE is bound by these regulations as prescribed and
amended by the College’s Management from time to time.

Order is a prerequisite for the smooth running of any institution or organisation. To ensure that there is
order, specific rules and regulations are necessary. Student’s Rules and Regulations are designed to
ensure that all students have an enabling environment to successfully complete their studies; and that
individual’s fundamental rights and freedoms shall at all times be respected and protected as stipulated
in the Constitution of the Republic of Malawi.

With mutual understanding and consideration by all members of the College community, the
framework of rules and regulations can only assist in completing the educational process and moulding
the students into good citizens. Students are expected to adhere to these rules and regulations, and as a
general principle to conduct themselves at all times whether on campus or away from it in a manner
that would promote the good name of students themselves and above all, the good reputation of the
College.

Ignorance of these rules and regulations contained in this document is no excuse. No student in
whatsoever capacity, is above these rules and regulations and any other rules and laws of Malawi.

1.2 Vision

The vision of the College is to be a center of excellence in quality teacher education and continuing
professional development.

1.3 Mission Statement


--- Page 7 ---
To train teachers who shall make positive contribution to national development, instill in them
attributes necessary for socio-economic growth and make education a life-long process through the

provision of quality teacher education.
14 Mandate

Mandate of the College is to train secondary school teachers and lecturers for primary school Teacher
Training Colleges (TTC). The College is also mandated to provide continuing professional development
to teachers and lecturers in TTC as well as providing training in teaching methods to various institutions

depending on their need.
1.5 Core Values

Core Value: To undertake its mission, mandate and realize its vision, DCE upholds the following

values:

1.5.1 Excellence: We offer teacher education programmes that are of the highest quality in Malawi and

beyond.

1.5.2 Professionalism: We conduct ourselves with decorum and adhere to professional standards and

the rule of law.

1.5.3 Innovation: We provide opportunities for the creation of new ideas and products through

teaching, learning, assessment and research.

1.5.4 Integrity: We adhere to moral and ethical principles by being honest, accountable and

transparent

1.5.5 Equity: We offer programmes and services that target students, staff and all stakeholders with

diverse needs:

1.5.6 Empowerment: We help the populace to develop socially and economically through market-

driven education programmes


--- Page 8 ---
1.6 Management of the College

The Controlling Officer of the College is the Principal, who is answerable to the Secretary for

Education at the Ministry of Education (MoE) Headquarters for the overall management of the

College and to the University of Malawi’s Academic Committee (AC) for academic related matters. .

The Principal is assisted by the following members of the Management Team in the day-to-day

running of the College:

iii.

vi.
vii.
viii.
ix.

The Deputy Principal, who is the head of academics.

The Director for Centre for Distance and Continuing Education, who is the head of Open,
Distance and Continuing Education.

The Director for Centre for Research Consultancy and Outreach, who is responsible for
coordinating research, consultancy and outreach programs.

The Director for Centre for Quality Assurance, who is responsible for maintenance of
desired standards and services.

The Registrar, who is the chief administration officer for the College;

The Deans of Faculty who are managers of their respective faculties, and coordinate all
matters relating to the academic welfare of the students within their faculties.

The Dean of Students who is responsible for students’ affairs in the College.

The Chief Accountant who is the fiscal officer and treasurer of the College.

The Chaplain, whose primary function is to counsel students, co-ordinate all religious
activities of the College as well as participating in matters relating to student deportment.
The Principal Librarian, who is the officer in-charge of the College Library and Learning
Resource Centre.

The Principal is also assisted by various committees (on governance oversight and general
administration).

1.7 Implementation of the rules
The College Officers charged with the administration of these rules will in particular have regard to

the
1.7.1

1.7.2

1.7.3

following principles:

The College is a society in which high standards of communal life must be established and
maintained for the benefit of both present and future members of the College.

A high level of personal integrity and a developed sense of responsibility towards others are as
important to the College as outstanding scholastic achievements.

A proper concern for the reputation of the College and what it stands for, makes it incumbent
upon its members to live decent and orderly lives.


--- Page 9 ---
1.7.4 Individual or collective actions by members of the College that constitute a breach of these rules
shall be subject to disciplinary action notwithstanding that the motive or goal of such action was
justifiable in the belief of such members.

1.8 Amendment
1.8.1 These regulations may be amended or reviewed from time to time at the discretion of the College
Management.
1.8.2 The posting of notice of any amendment of these regulations on official platforms of the College
shall constitute proper and sufficient notice to all students.


--- Page 10 ---
SECTION 2

REGISTRATION, ORIENTATION AND FEES

2.1 Registration

Registration is the systematic process of signing up for courses as part of the enrolment process so that a

candidate, after paying the required tuition and other fees and satisfying other documentary, medical

requirements and other obligations, may take up their reserved seats in particular classes and claim the

full rights and privileges of student status.

2.1.1

2.1.2
2.1.3
2.1.4

2.1.10

2.1.11

2.1.12

A person becomes a student of the College upon being selected, admitted and registered to a
programme of study offered by the College.

The selected person remains a candidate, until they have been registered by the College.

The first 14 days of the semester shall be the official days of registration.

Any student who fails to register on the official day(s) of registration may register upon paying a
late registration fee and shall do so not later than 14 days from the last day of the official
registration period. Late registration fee shall be determined by College Management from time
to time.

Students shall be registered upon payment of fees. Any student who has outstanding debts from
the previous semester shall not be permitted to register.

Every student of the College shall register using a Student Assessment and Registration
Information System (SARIS).

No student shall be allowed to register after 28 days from the start of each semester.

Every student whose fees are paid through any loan schemes or scholarship shall be required to
provide proof of the loan or scholarship notification to the College before registration.

No student with tuition and/ or other fees balances shall be allowed to sit for the end of semester
examinations or end of year examinations.

Any student who, for valid reasons, are unable to take up their place at the College in a
particular year, may request to reserve their place by submitting the request not later than 28
days from the first day of the first semester of the academic year in which they were expected to
register.

A place reserved under relevant regulation shall be reserved for a maximum of one year unless,
due to exceptional circumstances, the period may be extended by the College for one more
academic year. However, if the combination in which the student was admitted into, is not on
offer, the College will redirect the student to an available combination in which he/she is
meeting the requirements.

Any student who does not take up his/her place until the expiry of the reservation period shall
be required to file in a new application for admission into the College which will be considered
on the basis of the College Selection Criteria applicable at the time.

10


--- Page 11 ---
2.1.13

2.1.14

2.1.15

2.1.16

2.1.17

2.1.18

2.1.19

The College reserves the right to withhold registration of any student if it has reason to believe
that the true identity of such student cannot be established or verified by using names in
previous certificates.

A student shall not change the name by which he/she is initially registered unless they provide
official written document indicating that the change of name was effected in accordance with the
laws governing change of names in Malawi.

Every student shall be issued with a registration number which he/she shall use for registration
and identification for the duration of their studies in the College.

No student shall be permitted to attend any lecture, seminar, tutorial, laboratory session or any
other academic activity after the first 14 days of a semester if he or she has not registered.

All College programmes shall be completed within a specific period of time prescribed by the
College Management.

The Principal of the College shall, on recommendation of the Academic Committee, authorise the
de-registration of any student who fails to complete their programme of study within the
prescribed period.

Identification cards: Duly registered students shall be required to have identification cards to
access College services and shall be produced upon demand. The cost of producing the
identification card shall be borne by the student.

2.2 Orientation

Orientation is an activity conducted at the beginning of the academic year at a College to induct new

students to the College. During the orientation, academic and administrative staff members brief all

new students on the different courses offered, possible route maps and services that are offered by
the College. In this regard, therefore, it is mandatory for all the new students to attend the

orientation programme because it provides vital information regarding their College life and some

information is vital as it determines their stay in the College or their premature exist from the
College.

2.3. Change of Programme

2.3.1

2.3.2

2.3.3

2.3.4

Students are required to register on the programmes for which they were selected. Change of
programmes is, therefore, not permitted. However, under special circumstances, Deans of
Faculty may consider specific cases on a case-by-case basis.
Where the change is across faculties, the Deans involved shall discuss and examine whether or
not the candidate qualifies for the programme he or she wants to join, if there is space in the
programme he or she is interested to join and whether or not the host Dean is willing to release
the student and the receiving Dean is willing to take in the candidate.
Where the change is within the faculty, the Dean may consider the matter in liaison with the
relevant Heads of Department and make a recommendation to the Deputy Principal.
Where a consensus has been reached regarding the application, a recommendation, shall be
made to the Deputy Principal for approval on behalf of Academic Committee.

11


--- Page 12 ---
2.3.5

A student who has changed programmes shall maintain the same registration number for
his/her identity.

2.4 Fee Payment and other payments

2.4.1

2.4.2

2.4.3

2.4.4

2.4.5

2.4.6

2.4.7

2.4.8

All students shall, prior to registration, pay all fees, which shall include tuition fees. The amount
shall be prescribed by the College Management from time to time.

All students shall pay a membership fee to Student Representative Council and any other fees as
may be prescribed by the College Management from time to time before registration.

Every student has a personal responsibility to seek and secure his/her own loan or sponsorship
and the College is not obliged to assist the student in that regard.

The College charges its fees per academic year and these must be paid at the beginning of the
ensuing academic year. However, for administrative purposes, the fees can be paid in two
instalments at the beginning of each semester, with the first instalment being at least half of the
required fees.

The College may, at its discretion, consider individual fee paying arrangement based on written
commitment by the sponsor. Upon approval, the sponsor will be expected to comply with
his/her fee-paying commitment as approved. The student may be withdrawn at any time on
financial grounds should the sponsor fail to meet his/her commitment.

Fees paid in one academic year shall not be carried forward to another academic year. A student
who withdraws from the programme on personal, unofficial grounds including failure to pay
fees, shall be required to pay fees for the subsequent academic year.

Students shall pay the following fees and any other fees that may be introduced by the College
Management from time to time:

e Tuition fees e Academic assessment appeals

e SRC fee or remark fee

e Medical fees e Fees for preparation of

e Late Registration fee academic transcripts

e Referral/Supplementary e Academic reference letter fee
examinations e Certifying statement

e Customized teaching practice ¢ Graduation regalia fee

Students shall be required to meet costs relating to their stationery, printing, photocopying,
scanning and academic activities such as_ teaching practice, research and
attachments/ practical(s), accommodation and meals among others. The charges for these items
and services shall be published by the providers from time to time.

12


--- Page 13 ---
SECTION 3

GENERAL INSTITUTIONAL DRESS AND OUTLOOK

3.1 General institution dress code and outlook

3.1.1 This Section provides a written set of rules specifying the required style or manner of dress at
DCE. It defines the accepted way of dressing for students and the accepted outlook, including
hairstyles. As a teacher training institution, the daily dress code for students shall be smart or

smart casual.

3.1.2 All students are expected to be presentable and reflect the dressing of a dignified professional
teacher. Appearance standards are as follows:

a.
b.

™o a0

Attire must be neat, clean and modest.

Footwear is required. Footwear should be event appropriate and functional. Slippers

(flip-flops) can only be won and used in the places of residence or during social events.

Undergarments should not be visible.

Leggings can be won outside classes and must have a top or skirt covering.

Clothes need to be loose-fitting which does not draw attention to the body.

Dressing should not be revealing. Clothing displaying cleavage or the midriff are not
acceptable.

Sleeveless attire is permitted as long as the garment is not too low (front and/or back).

Back clothing must not extend below the bra line. For males, bare muscle attire is not

allowed in classes.

Head coverings (caps and hats etc.) should not be won in class or library except for

medical, and/or religious reasons.

For male students, formal dress shall mean well-ironed shirts, neck-tie, trousers and golf

shirts with appropriate trousers (pants), but no short trousers.

For female students, modest formal and smart dressing is encouraged.

Wearing of any political regalia is not accepted in instructional rooms and the library.

3.2 Hair must be kept neat, clean and well-groomed.

13


--- Page 14 ---
4.0

41

4.2

43

44

4.5

4.6

4.7
48
49
4.10

4.11

SECTION 4
CHAPLAINCY AND RELIGIOUS WORSHIP

Freedom of worship is a fundamental human right as enshrined in the Constitution of the
Republic of Malawi. As such DCE provides for such an environment in the following ways:

Students have the freedom to worship and participate in activities of any faith group recognised
by the College.

All religious activities in the College shall be coordinated through the office of the College
Chaplain or in his/her absence, coordination shall be done through the office of the Dean of
Students.

The Chaplain shall also be responsible for providing counselling and spiritual guidance to
students.

The Chaplain shall work closely with the Dean of Students to ensure that the spiritual and social
needs of the students are met.

The Chaplain’s office shall set up a database pertaining to religious affiliation of every student as
a member of the College Community to facilitate effective delivery of assistance when need
arises.

Students are encouraged to join students’ religious organizations recognized by the College.
Such organisations shall operate on College Campus upon approval by College Management
through the office of the Dean of Students to enhance students’ religious life.

The Office of the Chaplain is open to all students of different religious backgrounds.

The College Chaplain will minister to all students regardless of their religious backgrounds.
Faith group gatherings at the College Campus shall ensure that there is order and respect for
others in the College. Students are expected to observe religious tolerance at all times.

In case an organisation expresses interest to use College facilities and services, students should
consult the Office of the Registrar or the Office of the Dean of Students.

All religious activities shall take place outside the teaching timetable.

14


--- Page 15 ---
SECTION 5

COLLEGE FACILITIES

5.0 This section will look at rules and regulations guiding the use and care of the structures in the

teaching area, cafeteria, Halls of Residence and provision of transport services.

5.1 Lecture halls, Lecture theatres, lecture rooms, classrooms, laboratories, workshops, audio visual

rooms and other specialized rooms.

5.1.1

5.1.2

5.1.9
5.1.10

All students using lecture halls, lecture theatres, lecture rooms, classrooms, laboratories, toilets,
workshops and any like places shall leave the rooms in good order after use.

No student shall remove any furniture or any other property from any hostels, lecture theatres,
lecture rooms, laboratories, library, multipurpose hall, office, or any like places without
permission from the College Management.

Every student shall put on silent mode any mobile phone or other telecommunication device in
his/her possession during the course of any lecture, laboratory session, seminar, tutorial or other
academic activity unless otherwise stated.

No person shall use any specialized rooms, including laboratories, audio- visual rooms, studios
and any like rooms without prior permission from the relevant Head of Department.

No student or group of students shall use any room used for academic activities for
extracurricular activities without prior permission from the Registrar.

No part of any College building or facility may be used for a party, unless this is specifically
permitted in writing by the Registrar.

Every user of any room shall ensure that lights, fans, electronic equipment or any other device is
switched off prior to leaving the room.

No student shall be permitted to consume any alcohol or smoke or take any prohibited habit-
forming drugs inside any College lecture theatres, lecture rooms, library, laboratories,
workshops or elsewhere within College Campus, except in the recreation centre.

The College’s Senior Common shall be out of bounds for students.

Students are not allowed to study or linger around the staff offices and the administration block.

5.2 Cafeteria

5.2.1
5.2.2
5.2.3
5.2.4
5.2.5

5.2.6

The College has cafeteria that offers meals to residential students. The College Management will
prescribe procedures for accessing meals from cafeteria from time to time.

Each student shall receive a meal upon producing a meal card/ ticket.

Issues regarding the cafeteria shall be brought to the attention of the Director of Catering.

No special diet shall be offered to the students except on medical grounds, supported by a
certificate from a certified Medical practitioner provided that the College can afford such meals.
All cooked food shall be eaten while seated in the cafeteria. Students are not allowed to take food
out of cafeteria without prior arrangement with College authorities.

A student shall only be allowed one share of a meal.

15


--- Page 16 ---
5.2.7
5.2.8
5.2.9
5.2.10
5.2.11

5.2.12

5.2.13

5.2.14

5.2.15

5.2.16

5.2.17

5.2.18

Breakfast shall be served from 5:30 am to 7:00 am; lunch shall be served from 11:00 am to 1:30
pm, and supper shall be served from 5:30 pm to 7: 00 pm.

Students shall respect queues when meals are served.

Food shall be reserved for students coming from a trip.

All food leftovers should be placed in trash cans available in the cafeteria.

Cafeteria services will be provided by an outsourced company in liaison with the College
Management.

The College shall have a Catering Committee responsible for matters relating to students’
catering. The Committee shall comprise the Registrar or his/her representative, a Procurement
officer, the Dean of students, the Wardens, a representative of the provider of catering service for
the time being, the Cafeteria Directors or any two representatives from the Student
Representative Council.

No student shall be permitted to consume any alcohol or smoke or take any prohibited habit-
forming drugs inside College cafeteria.

All students are expected to use cafeteria furniture appropriately. Students are not allowed to
stand or sit on tables. Students who damage the furniture will be expected to repair or replace
the damaged furniture.

Furniture or any equipment belonging to the cafeteria shall not be taken out of the cafeteria
without permission from College authorities.

All students are expected to adhere to all outlined rules and regulations for conduct in the
cafeteria stipulated by the Catering Committee in liaison with the catering service provider.

No student is allowed to enter the food preparation area in the kitchen other than students who
are members of the Catering Committee.

Any issues, grievances that a student(s) has/have pertaining to cafeteria services should be
addressed to the Catering Committee through their Students’ Representatives.

5.3 Library and Learning Resource Centre

5.3.1

5.3.2

5.3.3
5.3.4
5.3.5
5.3.6
5.3.7

DCE Library and Learning Resource Center is equipped with modern furniture and equipment
to support teaching, learning and research support services to users. All library users shall abide
by the Library Rules and Regulations as provided from time to time. Violation of rules and
regulations shall attract penalties accordingly.

No library material may be taken out of the library unless they have been properly borrowed
and stamped.

Items taken in and out of the library are subject to security inspection.

Library users must be searched on exit.

Noise and causing disturbance in the library is prohibited.

Briefcases, bags, overcoats, hats/caps are not allowed in the library.

Smoking, eating and drinking in the library are prohibited.

16


--- Page 17 ---
5.3.8

5.3.9

5.3.10

5.3.11
5.3.12

5.3.13
5.3.14

Cell phones must be on silent in the library; no library user is allowed to answer a call in the
library.
When working on college computers, the following are strictly prohibited:
a. installation and/or deleting of software
saving data on hard disk
changing the configurations
cracking computers (logging into computers illegally)
viewing pornographic and other related materials

mepaog

uploading and/or downloading non-academic video content

g. personification of computers
Any person removing library materials from the library without following procedures and/or
defacing library material shall be subject to disciplinary action, which may include suspension
from using the library or expulsion from the College.
Lost library materials shall be replaced by the concerned library user.
Where the lost library material is not available on the market, the College will charge the
concerned library user the cost of the item, and all other related expenses required to replace the
material.
Fines shall be imposed in all non-returned library materials.
The College Library staff have the authority to search students and their rooms for missing
library materials, together with the security section of the College.

5.4 The Halls of Residence

5.4.1

5.4.2

5.4.3

5.4.4

5.4.5

5.4.6

All Halls of Residence are the property of the College, and the College management has a
prerogative to allocate any room to any student in accordance with the prescribed criteria
determined from time to time.

The admission into the College Halls of Residence shall require that the student abides to the
rules and regulations set to ensure harmony and security at the premises.

Any misconduct or noncompliance will lead to serious disciplinary measures which includes
serious warnings, eviction from the Halls of Residence and eventual dismissal from College.

Students who are evicted from the Halls of Residence shall be responsible for finding their own
accommodation outside campus.

The rooms are handed over to the students by the Warden when the students have accepted the
state or conditions and the inventory of the room, and signed the residency agreement.

Fire hazards such as candles and incense, gasoline, paint thinner burning/bursting of crackers
and oil lamps are not permitted in the Halls of Residence.

17


--- Page 18 ---
5.4.7

5.4.8

5.4.9

5.4.10

5.4.11

5.4.12

5.4.13,

5.4.14

5.4.15

5.4.16

5.4.17

5.4.18

5.4.19

5.4.20

5.4.21

Residents must ensure lights are switched off before leaving their rooms.
Smoking in the rooms is not allowed.
Cleaning of the rooms must be done by their occupants.

Students are required to apply for accommodation in the Halls of Residence and only successful
students shall be offered a place.

There is no permanent occupancy of the Halls of Residence.

The College reserves the right of admission into the Hall of residence and may inspect them at
any time.

The College reserves the right to expel from their room any student who abuses or misuses a
room in any Hall of residence.

Every student shall complete a residency agreement form before occupying the room.

Any student who suffers injury, loss, discomfort or any other adverse consequence resulting
from the conduct of another student who infringes these Regulations should report the matter to
the hall representative to resolve the issue. If the problem persists, the matter should be taken to
either the Warden or Dean of Students for appropriate action.

Students who are allocated College accommodation shall remain in the same room in that
academic year, unless if they are withdrawn or evicted from the Hall of residence by the College
Management.

Any student who is allocated College accommodation shall not be permitted to accommodate
any other person in the allocated accommodation or to sublet the whole or any part of the
students’ Halls of Residence for financial consideration or otherwise.

No student shall be permitted to store or use any illegal drugs or any weapons, including
firearms, in the Halls of Residence and any part of the College.

No student shall store or consume any liquor or any habit forming drugs/substances or smoke
within the Halls of Residence.

No student shall operate a printing business or grocery or a pub or a brothel or any of its kind in
any Hall of Residence.

Every student shall at all times ensure that utilities are switched off after use, whether it is in the
Halls of Residence or in the teaching area.

18


--- Page 19 ---
5.4.22

5.4.23

5.4.24

5.4.25

5.4.26

5.4.27

5.4.28

5.4.29

5.4.30

5.4.31

5.4.32

5.4.33

Students should turn off water taps and switch off electricity if there is dry taps and electricity
black out respectively.

Members of the opposite sex shall not be allowed to visit Halls of Residence of different sex
between 10:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.

Students in all rooms are not permitted to share a bed with anybody at any time.

Residents should ensure that their visiting students do not introduce or take alcoholic drinks,
illegal drugs or smoke in the Halls of Residence.

Students who are married to each other and want to reside together, must seek alternative
accommodation outside campus.

Cooking is not permitted in any of the Halls of Residence. Possession of such equipment as
heaters, hot plates, cookers, kettles is prohibited and shall lead to eviction from the Halls of
Residence.

All students have the obligation to care for all College facilities and shall be liable to compensate
the College in full for any damage or loss caused to College property.

Damage caused to rooms or facilities in the room shall be presumed to have been caused by the
resident to whom such a room has been allocated unless the contrary is proved. Where two
students share a room, responsibility for any damage or loss caused shall be shared equally
between them unless there is clear evidence that only one of them caused the damage or loss.

The utility area must be kept clean by leaving bathrooms, showers, toilets and laundry areas
clean and in good condition for others to use.

Radios and other musical instruments may be played in the Halls of Residence within specified
time, provided they do not disturb others. No radio or musical instruments shall be played after
9: 30 pm and before 6; 00 am. Students playing loud music or radio at odd hours shall attract a
warning or confiscation of their equipment.

No student shall hold a party in any hall of residence.

Students wishing to spend a night outside the campus shall seek exit permission to do so from
the Wardens. The Wardens shall consider the request on behalf of the Registrar. Those applying
for permission must state the date and time of his/her intended departure and return as well as
the destination and purpose. However, the College shall not be responsible for the security of
the room and their property in the occupant’s absence. The student is expected to make
appropriate arrangements to cover for their academic obligations during their absence. The
College is not responsible for whatever happens to the student outside the campus while on
personal business.

19


--- Page 20 ---
5.4.34

5.4.35

5.4.36

5.4.37

5.4.38

5.4.39

5.4.40

5.4.41

Students who have gone outside the campus shall be required to report upon return to the
warden who granted permission for exit.

Residents must act in a way not to destroy or damage property owned or controlled by the
College. If a resident causes any damage they will have to pay for the cost of repair or
replacement of the damaged property.

Residents should lock their rooms when leaving, and should take their keys with them.
Residents are not allowed to give their keys to other people.

Lost or damaged keys must be reported immediately and occupants shall settle replacement
costs.

College authorities reserve the right to enter Hostel rooms for inspections, searches, or audits.
Authorized personnel will make every effort to have at least one room resident present when
they enter, but if this is not possible, they will nevertheless proceed.

Students must occupy rooms specifically allocated to them. They are not allowed to change
rooms except with the written permission of the Warden.

Students are advised not to keep large amounts of cash or valuables in the room. Each student is
responsible for the safety of his/her belongings inside the room.

All residents are requested to use water judiciously and preserve it. Any water leakage should be
immediately reported to the authorities through Wardens.

5.5 Residence during Vacation.

5.5.1

5.5.2

No student shall be allowed to stay in the hostels during a long vacation of at least five working
days or more.

In cases where students have been called by College management during vacation, they will be
subjected to all relevant rules and regulations.

5.6 Hall Representatives

5.6.1

5.6.2

Every hall of residence shall have a Hall Representative.

A Hall Representative shall be elected by the residents of each hall of residence and shall have
the responsibility to coordinate activities pertaining to the general welfare, domestic relations

20


--- Page 21 ---
and discipline among students in the Halls of Residence and to represent the residents of his/her
hall of residence in their contact with the College management and other stakeholders.

5.6.3 Hall representatives shall work hand in hand with the Wardens in carrying out their duties and
they shall refer to the Wardens any matters requiring their attention.

5.6.4 Hall representative shall report any indiscipline case to the warden

5.6.5 Hall representative shall report matters of illness and other problems to the Students
Representative Council through Directorate of Social Welfare.

5.7 The Wardens

5.7.1 The College shall have male and female wardens whose mandate shall be to oversee activities in
the Halls of Residence and discharge specific duties which shall include, but not be limited to
those related to the following areas of student life:

5.7.1.1 Overseeing the general welfare and domestic relations of the residents which includes ensuring a
harmonious environment among residents and attending to conflicts or misunderstandings
amongst the residents to avoid them escalating into violence;

5.7.1.2 Ensuring discipline among residents;

5.7.1.3 Ensuring that fittings, provisions and installations in the Halls of Residence are available in
working order and attended to when they need repair;

5.7.1.4 Inspecting the rooms to ensure proper housekeeping;
5.7.1.5 Inspecting and ensuring that hygiene and sanitation standards are maintained by the residents;
5.7.1.6 Advising students on who to approach on specific issues including academic matters;

5.7.1.7 Conveying to residents’ important messages from within or outside the campus on behalf of the
Registrar such as funeral messages, illnesses affecting relatives and other internal official
information outside working hours.

21


--- Page 22 ---
SECTION 6

STUDENT SERVICES

6.0 This Section introduces some of important services available on campus and the

accompanying policies, rules and regulations. Such services include _ transport,

medical/health services and counselling.

6.1 Transport services

6.1.1

All Students who are ill shall be entitled to transport to and from hospital in the
event of referral.

College transport may be used for approved trips by the organisers of any student
association affiliated to the College Students Council at such charge as the
Registrar may determine from time to time.

The patron of any student association or organisation or his/her appointee shall
accompany members of the association or organisation on all trips.

All requests for use of transport must be submitted in writing to the Registrar at
least 5 working days before the date of the proposed travel.

Any request for the use of College transport shall be made using transport
booking form which shall include the following:

The destination and purpose of the journey.

The date and time when the transport will be required.

The expected date and time of return.

The full names and registration numbers of students travelling on the trip.
Estimated cost for the trip.

The full name, registration number and signature of the organizer of the trip, who
shall be responsible for booking before the trip is made.

Commitment by the organizer to ensure discipline and to report any student who
may display any conduct of indiscipline during the trip.

Name of the staff member accompanying the students.

Name and signature of the Patron.

22


--- Page 23 ---
6.1.6

6.1.8

6.1.10

6.1.11

6.1.12

6.1.13

6.1.14

6.1.15

6.1.16

The Registrar shall not approve the use of transport by members of any
association or organisation unless the Chairperson or President of the association
or organisation that requests such transport signs an undertaking to be held
responsible for any damage or loss caused during the trip by any conduct of any
member of the group and any act committed by any person on the trip which
might bring the name of the College into disrepute.

Every student shall respect other road users and staff members while on College
vehicle.

Students shall not litter, maim or disfigure the vehicle. Members of the executive
committee of any organisation or association that is granted permission to use
transport shall be responsible for any violations of this rule.

Members of the executive committee of any organisation or association that is
granted permission to use transport shall ensure that the vehicle provided is
not overloaded and no driver employed or hired shall drive any vehicle if it
exceeds its prescribed maximum number of passengers.

The Students Representative Council in liaison with the organisation of any trip
shall ensure that the College vehicles are not vandalized.

No passenger on any vehicle of the College shall ride on its top or windows or
doors or in any manner that is hazardous to the safety of the passenger or other
passengers.

Any student who violates any law during the course of a trip shall bear personal
responsibility for such violation; provided that the organizers of the trip may
also bear responsibility as prescribed by the law.

The Registrar shall not authorize the use of College vehicles for travel by students
to political functions.

No student shall consume alcohol in any vehicle owned or hired by the College.
Any student who is drunk shall not be permitted into any vehicle owned or
hired by the College.

Where a College vehicle is not available, students travelling on College business
shall use most convenient public transport.

Any student violating these rules shall be summoned before the disciplinary
committee.

23


--- Page 24 ---
6.2

Medical/health services

6.2.1

6.2.4

All students shall pay a medical contribution fee determined by the College management
from time to time.

Students shall ensure their personal health by abiding by all hygiene rules.

Management will treat seriously any suspicious disease outbreak and take all the
precautionary measures.

The College clinic shall be the first point of consultation for all medical services.
However, sick students wishing to consult other medical service providers shall make
their own arrangements for travel and other related expenses to such facilities.

Any illness should be reported to the Warden who shall in turn report to the Dean of
Students for further reporting to the Registrar, Dean, Head of Department and to the
lecturers concerned.

Where a student is admitted at any hospital, the Dean of Students in liaison with the
Registrar shall inform the parents or guardians immediately to provide the guardian
support at the hospital.

Where the illness persists to an extent that the student misses two consecutive weeks of
classes, the student shall accordingly be advised to withdraw on medical grounds and the
place shall be reserved for the subsequent academic year.

Where an illness requires an isolation after the student has been discharged from the
hospital, the student shall be required to go home during the required period.

24


--- Page 25 ---
SECTION 7

STUDENT SUPPORT SERVICES

7.1 Entertainment.

7.11

7.1.2

Students are eligible to various acceptable forms of entertainment.

All entertainment activities shall be approved by the College Management after a written
request.

Such entertainment will be confined to weekends except in very exceptional circumstances.

The SRC will organize and fund such activities but occasionally and depending on the nature of
entertainment, Management may come in to assist.

No student shall use college property for private business.
No entertainment will be held in the gymnasium.

Entertainment activities will not be held every weekend in order to give room for other activities.

7.2 Death of a student

7.2.1

7.2.2

7.2.3

7.2.4

7.2.5

7.2.6

The provisions contained in this section confer privileges not entitlements.

In the event that a student dies while in College, all funeral arrangements relating to the death of
the student shall be made in liaison with the family of the deceased.

If the student dies in the course of the semester, the College shall, in liaison with the family,
provide a standard coffin to carry the remains of the deceased to his/her home as indicated on
his/her student registration form.

In the event of death of a student while in academic session, the College Management shall
provide transport to a limited number of students to accompany the body of the deceased on its
repatriation to his or her home.

All lectures, seminars, tutorials, laboratory sessions, library services and other academic
activities on campus shall be suspended for a determined period by the College management
until burial occurs.

If a student dies during the period for examinations, the College administration may, at its
discretion, postpone some examinations to a later date in order to enable students who wish to
attend the funeral to do so.

25


--- Page 26 ---
7.2.7

7.2.8

7.2.9

7.2.10

7.2.11

7.2.12

When a student dies during recess, the College shall not bear any responsibility for any
arrangements or costs in relation to the funeral of the deceased student. However, the College
may provide transport and food for some staff and students to attend the funeral ceremony.

Every student escorting the remains of a deceased student or attending the funeral of a deceased
student shall be expected not to engage in any conduct that brings the College to disrepute.

The College may organize a memorial ceremony for a deceased student at a time that does not
coincide with the class timetable.

All students attending the funeral of a student shall have to register with the Students’
Representative Council with a copy sent to the Dean of students.

Any student attending such funeral ceremonies shall not receive any allowances from the
College.

In an event that the College provides transport logistics during funeral ceremonies, the students
will be provided with transport to and from the Campus only. The College shall therefore not be
responsible for any other extension.

26


--- Page 27 ---
SECTION 8

INSTITUTIONAL POLICIES

8.0 This section covers general regulations and institutional polices not covered in the other sections of

this Handbook. It is important to note that students should read and become familiar with all

sections of this handbook, as they will be held responsible for violations of these policies.

8.1 Policy on discrimination

8.1.1

Discrimination against any persons in any form is prohibited under the Republic of
Malawi's Constitution (Chapter 4, Sec. 20-24).

DCE expects all members of its community to treat each other with respect and civility.

Discriminatory behaviours directed to any member of the community will not be
tolerated.

DCE believes that all people are equal before the law (Malawi Constitution, Chapter. 3,
Sec. 12).

DCE shall therefore not discriminate against any person, be it student or staff, on grounds
of race, sex, language, religion, political affiliations or other opinions, nationality, ethnic
or social origin, disability, wealth, HIV/AIDS status or other statuses.

Students or staff are guaranteed equal opportunity during selection, admission,
assessment, appointment into positions and appraisal for career development within the
legal and public policy frameworks.

8.2 Policy on Inclusivity

DCE shall respect the rights of persons with disability and special needs.
DCE shall respect the law which prohibits discrimination of persons with disability.

DCE believes that persons with disability and special needs have the right to higher
education.

DCE believes that it has the responsibility to ensure that its structures and access routes
are designed and made in such a way that they are friendly to persons with disability;
and make appropriate adjustments to existing structures and access points where
necessary to promote easy access.

DCE believes that it has the responsibility to provide for facilities to support the learning
of students with special needs.

27


--- Page 28 ---
8.2.6

8.2.10

8.2.11

DCE believes it has the responsibility to have trained staff in special needs so that they
are able to design teaching, learning and assessment strategies that meet the needs of all
students, including those with special needs.

DCE shall strive to create an enabling environment that protects persons with special
needs to ensure smooth learning.

In a case where a student has been assessed that he/she would or is experiencing
challenges to undergo a particular course combination due to the degree of his/her
physical challenges or special need, he/she shall be advised to be redirected into another
course combination of his/her choice where necessary as long as he/she has all the
necessary requirements.

DCE shall give priority to students with disability and/or special needs with regard to
student accommodation.

Where the College has admitted students with disability and special needs, the Registrar
shall in advance inform the Dean of Faculty and the Head of Department where the
student belongs with a view to alert academic staff in the class he/ she will be attending
to plan ahead and to advise appropriate special delivery strategies to benefit the student.
The Librarian and Learning Resources Specialist and other service areas shall also be
informed to plan for appropriate provision and facilities for the student with disability
and special needs.

Students with disability and special needs shall be exempted from queuing in order to
access services.

8.3 Policy on gender

8.3.1

DCE shall respect the law which prohibits discrimination against individuals on the basis
of sex.

DCE shall respect and promote the rights of women in society as it realises and
appreciates the need to work towards gender equity.

DCE shall strive to be a gender sensitive institution of higher learning, promoting gender
equity and gender equality in teaching and learning processes and in its management
practices.

DCE shall formulate appropriate strategies to mainstream gender within the system.
DCE shall strive to achieve t 50% enrolment of female students in all its programmes.

28


--- Page 29 ---
8.3.6 DCE shall conduct gender awareness campaigns for students with the aim to have at least
50% representation of females within their leadership structure during elections.

8.3.7 DCE shall strive to achieve 50% female representation in meetings which Management
holds from time to time with the student body, as part of the process of mainstreaming
gender and women empowerment.

8.4 Worship

8.4.1 DCE shall respect the Republic of Malawi Constitution which prohibits discrimination of
individuals based on religion.

8.4.2. DCE shall respect the Republic of Malawi Constitution which guarantees freedom of
worship, with regard to the social or mutual existence and respect for other members of
the institution.

8.4.3 DCE students shall be free to worship at their respective places.

8.5 Sexual Harassment

8.5.1 Sexual harassment is strictly prohibited and examples of conduct that, if unwelcome, may
constitute sexual harassment, depending upon the totality of the circumstances including
the severity of the conduct and its frequency or pervasiveness, include;

8.5.1.1 Enquiries into another person’s sexual experience, discussions of one’s sexual
activities, comments on an individual's body or about the individual’s sexual activity,
deficiencies or prowess.

8.5.1.2 Sexual innuendo, use of sexually explicit or vulgar language; unnecessary sexually
suggestive remarks about parts of the body.

8.5.1.3 Sexually oriented teasing or practical jokes or “humour” about gender specific traits.
8.5.1.4 Sexually suggestive body language or gestures.

8.5.1.5 Display or transmission of sexually suggestive objects, pictures, posters, cartoons,
videos, or other electronic or visual materials.

8.5.1.6 Physical contact such as unwelcome touching, patting, pinching, or brushing against
one’s body; forced sexual activity, sexual assault or violence.

8.5.1.7 Continued writing of sexually suggestive notes, conversations or letters when it is
known or should be known that the addressee does not welcome them;

29


--- Page 30 ---
8.5.1.8 Derogatory or provocative remarks relating to a student's sex.

8.5.1.9 Demands for sexual favours in exchange for favourable academic

assessment or any other academic favour.

8.6 Remedies for Harassment

The College shall provide prompt responses to allegations of harassment or retaliation.

Any student who feels that he or she is a victim of sexual harassment is entitled to file a
complaint to the Dean of Students in confidence.

The College may address complaints of sexual harassment through informal mediation or
formal disciplinary action against the alleged perpetrator of the alleged harassment,
depending on the severity and nature of the complaint and as far as possible, in
accordance with the wishes of the complainant.

8.7 Procedures for resolving harassment cases

8.7.1

A student who has a complaint may choose to resolve the problem using the informal
procedures which will consist of discussion and/or mediation; provided that the
complainant will be dully advised and counselled by the Dean of Students.

The Dean of Students shall also be responsible to act as mediator during the informal
procedure for handling complaints of alleged harassment; provided that where any
informal process of mediation is not concluded to the satisfaction of the complainant
within five days from the date of the submission of the complaint, the complainant may
request the formal disciplinary proceedings.

A complaint of harassment will be investigated promptly and fairly and, as far as
practicable, care shall be taken to protect the identity of all parties to the complaint,
consistent with the requirements of a thorough and appropriate investigation. However,
no anonymous complaints will be processed by the Dean of Students or any officer of the
College.

Records and complaints filed, action taken to remedy the problem, the names of those
involved, and the outcome will be maintained by the Dean of Students but no record of
the informal stage shall be maintained on the personal files of any of the people involved.

Complaints should be reported promptly so that appropriate action may be
taken while the recollection of events is most clear.

30


--- Page 31 ---
8.8 Channels of communication
8.8.1 All official communications shall be in writing.

8.8.2 Correspondences from the Student Representative Council shall be from the Office of the
President and may be counter-signed by the Secretary or Speaker of the council as the
case may be.

8.8.3. Any communication made by the student to any person or _ institution
outside the College on behalf of societies, clubs and other groups
operating in the College must first be vetted by the office of the Dean of Students, who
will in addition advise the student in question on the correct
procedures.

8.8.4 No student shall speak on behalf of the College. All communication from
any student in his or her personal capacity to outsiders should be clearly stated that the
views expressed therein are not of the College but the student.

8.8.5 The Student Representative Council or any member of the student community shall not
grant interviews to the media on issues regarding the management of the
College.

8.8.6 Official records of meetings between management and Student Representative Council
shall be taken by the Registrar and official announcements resulting from
such meetings shall be made by the Registrar. Students are not allowed to release any
written document produced by the College.

8.8.7 All correspondences to the College must be addressed to the Principal.
Where necessary, attention should be indicated to the intended recipient.

8.9 Publications

8.9.1 Publications at DCE must observe the following Code of Ethics that inform
the community fairly and truthfully.

8.9.2 All students’ publications shall expressly state on their editorial page that the
opinions therein expressed are not those of the College.

8.9.3 All students’ publications shall disclose the authentic names of their editors and authors.

8.9.4 Any student publication shall, before it is printed, published or distributed be
approved by a patron who shall be any member of staff who will be answerable in case a
need arises.

31


--- Page 32 ---
8.9.10

8.9.11

8.10

8.11

8.11.1

8.11.2

In a presentation of news and comments in any student publication, there shall be no
wilful departure from facts through distortion, significant omissions, undue
summarization or exaggeration.

Rumour, unconfirmed news and comments in any student publication should be
clearly identified, distinguished and presented as such.

Every student publication shall check, as far as practicable, the accuracy of
news items before publication.

Any student publication shall publish as facts only that which is reasonably
believed to be true, having regard to the source, and such facts shall be
published fairly with due regard to the source, context and importance.

Headlines shall reflect fairly the content of the news report or article in which they
appear.

No student shall publish or post obscene, defamatory, salacious or pornographic content.

No person shall not remove any office notice from any notice boards at any premises
controlled by the College without permission of the Registrar or any office delegated to
be in charge of the notice boards in question.

HIV and AIDS

The College recognizes the growing epidemic of Human Immune Deficiency Virus
(HIV) infection at the global, national, and local levels. DCE embraces all public policies
on HIV and AIDS that may apply to students in public institutions. Specific Safeguards
are felt to be important for sero-positive individuals. These safeguards are built primarily
around issues of confidentiality and non-discrimination.

Freedom of expression and demonstrations

The College supports the rights of its students, faculty and staff to assemble and express
their views. However, any protest or demonstration must be within the law and, must
not block streets, right of way, or sidewalks; jeopardize the safety of individuals or the
integrity of the College or other property; intimidate, harass, or threaten any member of
the public.

There shall be a grievance handling procedure which must be followed when there is a
misunderstanding between Management and students.

Management shall implement an open-door policy and discuss with the Students
Representative Council on matters concerning students.
32


--- Page 33 ---
8.11.3

8.11.4

8.11.5

8.11.6

8.12

8.12.1

8.12.2

8.12.3

8.12.4

8.12.5

All matters concerning students shall be channelled through the Students
Representative Council.

DCE shall respect the right of its students to assemble, express their views and
demonstrate without use of violence or weapons.

Students shall discuss issues in a properly constituted General Assembly. It shall be
understood that the General Assembly for the Student Representative Council is a
meeting for students, therefore, no staff member shall be demanded to appear before the
general assembly to address students on any issue before it.

The Speaker, the President and the Vice-President shall present minutes
of the General Assembly to the Principal and to the Registrar not later than three
days after the assembly and where necessary shall request for an appointment
with Management at the earliest opportunity to discuss the issues that require
Management’s attention.

Academic Freedom

Academic freedom is the conviction that freedom of inquiry is essential to the
mission of academy as well as the principle of academia, and that scholars
should have freedom to teach, learn or communicate ideas or facts including
those that are inconvenient to external political groups or to authorities without
being targeted for disciplinary action, repression, or dismissal. According to Cary Nelson
(2010) academic freedom means the following:

Both Faculty members and students can interact in intellectual debate without fear of
censorship or retaliation.

Both Faculty members and students can make comparisons and contrasts between
subjects taught in a course and any field of human knowledge or period of history.

Both students and faculty members have the right to express _ their
views- in speech, writing, and through electronic communication, both on
and off campus- without fear of sanctions, unless the manner of expression
substantially impairs the right of others.

Both students and faculty members have the right to study and do research on topics they
choose and to draw conclusions which are consistent with their research.

Political, religious or philosophical beliefs of politicians, administrators, and members of
public cannot be imposed on students or faculty.

33


--- Page 34 ---
8.12.6 Faculty members and students have the right to seek redress or request a hearing if they
believe their rights have been violated.

8.12.7 Both students and faculty members are protected from reprisals for disagreeing with
administrative policies and proposals.

8.12.8 Both students and faculty members have the right to challenge one another’s views, but
not to penalize them for holding them.

8.12.9 Faculty members’ authority to assign grades to students is protected, so long as the
grades are not capricious or unjustly punitive. More broadly, academic freedom
encompasses both individual and institutional right to maintain academic standards.

8.12.10 DCE as an_ institution of higher learning guarantees its students and
staff academic freedom in line with provisions as stipulated under Section 8.11

8.13 Alcohol, Smoking and other habit-inducing substances.

8.13.1

8.13.1

8.13.2

8.13.3

8.13.4

8.13.5

8.13.6

8.13.7

Individual student must maintain responsibility for their own decisions and actions regarding
the use of alcoholic beverages, and should be prepared to accept consequences associated with
any violation of College rules and laws of the country.

No person or group of persons shall sell, consume, serve, or assist any other person to sell or
serve liquor on College Campus, unless the requirements of all applicable laws on selling and
consumption of alcohol have been complied with; and permission to sell or serve, as the case
may be, has been granted by the Principal or his other nominee.

All college students’ recreation centres shall abide by all applicable laws regulating the selling
and consumption of alcohol.

College students’ recreation centres shall be required to operate within a specified number of
hours per day as prescribed by the College Management from time to time.

A student shall not wilfully cause or attempt to cause another student, staff or any other person
to be intoxicated on College Campus.

A student shall not have or bring any alcoholic drink to any lecture both at College Campus or
any lecture organised outside College.

No minor shall smoke or possess or consume alcohol on any premises under the control of the
College.

Smoking is not allowed within buildings or close to groups of people.

34


--- Page 35 ---
8.13.8 Any student of DCE shall not be in possession of habit inducing substance (Habit inducing
substances include among others; opiates, morphine, heroin, hallucinogens, marijuana,
depressants: benzodiazepine and stimulants: cocaine, nicotine, amphetamine).

8.13.9 No student of DCE shall be the actual or intended purchaser, possessor or distributor, prescriber
or user of habit inducing substances without prescription.

8.13.10 Any student of DCE shall not be present at a gathering where there is obvious habit inducing
substance use.

8.13.11 The College may inform local police of illegal drug violations.

8.13.12 Where habit inducing substances are found in a shared Hall of Residence room, the College may
find all occupants of the room responsible for the habit inducing substance violation if it is
unable to ascertain which student (s) possessed and /or used the substance.

35


--- Page 36 ---
SECTION 9

CODE OF CONDUCT AND STUDENT BEHAVIOUR

9.1 There are various forms of behaviour about which it is impossible to frame precise rules.

Nevertheless, certain kinds of behaviour are likely to bring the College into disrepute or would
discredit the good name or are detrimental to good governance, good order and peace of the
College. Any such conduct within or outside the confines of the College will be considered a breach
of discipline and will be punished as such, whether or not it attracts the attention of the police. Acts
of misconduct shall include, but not limited to the following:

9.1.1

9.1.2
9.1.3

9.1.4

9.1.5

9.1.8

9.1.9

9.1.10
9.1.11
9.1.12
9.1.13
9.1.14
9.1.15

9.1.16

Playing of any instrument at loud volumes or shouting on top of one’s voice in a way that
inconveniences others in the neighbourhood.

Failure to obey lawful orders from an officer of the College.

Conduct that intentionally obstructs or disrupts teaching/learning or freedom of movement or
other lawful activities on the College campus.

Mobilising or inciting others to engage in any unlawful activity, whose mobilization or
incitement leads directly to such unlawful conduct on the College campus.

If a group of students with common intention commits any offence each member of the group
shall be held liable for such offence regardless of the fact that only one or more of the students in
the group can be identified.

Malicious damage or misuse of property whether such property is located on or outside the
premises of the College, including, but not limited to vandalism, interference with electrical
fittings, unauthorized use of telephones, water and electricity in all campus facilities.

Theft and receiving or buying or concealment of property with knowledge or reasonable
suspicion that it has been stolen.

Defamation.

Dressing indecently contrary to the College’s values and dressing code.

Carrying out an abortion or causing an abortion.

Failure to report or reporting late for classes.

Failure to attend, without valid reason, a meeting of the Students Disciplinary committee when
summoned to do so in writing by the Committee.

Withholding information that would assist in the proceedings of any hearing by the Students’
Disciplinary Committee.

Willful obstruction of the work or proceedings of the Student Disciplinary Committee or
interference with witness or evidence.

Failure to abide by the ruling, decision, and penalty made or imposed by the Student
Disciplinary Committee or any other Committee of the College.

Being found in the halls of the opposite sex; or hosting a member of opposite sex in the Halls of
Residence outside the stipulated time.

36


--- Page 37 ---
9.1.17

9.1.18

9.1.19

9.1.20
9.1.21
9.1.22

9.1.23
9.1.24
9.1.25

9.1.26
9.1.27

9.1.28
9.1.29

9.1.30
9.1.31

9.1.32

9.1.33

9.1.34
9.1.35

Trespassing on College property or property that belongs to or is in the lawful possession or
control of any other student, member of staff or visitor of the College.
Physical abuse of any person, or conduct intended to threaten imminent bodily harm or to
endanger the health or safety of any person on or outside the College campus.
Engage in unlawful sexual activities including, but not limited to; rape, sexual assault, sexual
harassment, prostitution or loitering for the purpose of soliciting sex, indecent exposure or
behavior, sodomy, bestiality, homosexuality (practicing gay or lesbian acts), production or
distribution of pornography.
Being in a relationship with a lecturer, member of administrative and/or support staff
Conduct on College campus constituting a sexual offence, whether forcible or non-forcible.
Gaining unauthorized access to any electronically held data, or network, or program, or any
other form of computer hacking, or the deliberate transportation or creation of any form of
computer virus, worm, Trojan or keystroke logger.
Using College resources to access offensives sites such as pornographic sites.
Using abusive verbal language or singing unacceptable abusive songs.
Forgery, alteration, or misuse of any College document, record, key, electronic device, or
identification.
Disrupting teaching and learning.
Open defiance of authority and any acts of insubordination in word or action to those in
authority;
Being involved in fighting or wanton assault.
Operating under the influence of alcohol and any other intoxication drugs, or any such related
misbehaviour associated with the state of insobriety.
Dealing in drugs on College premises or in the immediate area of the College.
Serious and deliberate breaking of health and safety rules which put other students and College
property in danger.
Any act which:

i. Constitutes breach of the College charter or statutes or rules and regulations.

ii.  Interferes with the governance or proper administration of the College.

iii. | Is an offence under laws of Malawi.
Be aware that the acts of serious or gross misconduct, such as those listed above will affect your
future. Not only do you risk not being allowed to study at Domasi College of Education, but you
may also end up with a criminal record.
Cyber bullying and or online attacks to any student and staff of the College are serious offences.
Be aware that a repeated minor offence or offences (be it the same or different offences) shall
build up into a major offence which may attract stiffer penalties.

37


--- Page 38 ---
9.2 Offences and penalties

9.2.1 The table below indicates offences and penalties but is not limited to these. The disciplinary
committee has directed powers to impose additional penalties

 

The College shall sanction a student for the following | Disciplinary sanctions _ shall

 

acts as minor offences include, but not limited to:
a. Smoking in communal areas such as classrooms, i. Warning
library Halls of Residence, dining hall, ii, Verbal and/or written
gymnasium reprimand
b. Removal and defacing of official notices iii, Restitution
c. Leaving lights or water on after use iv. Forfeiture
d. Coming late for classes v. Removal from Halls of
e. Making noise in the library, teaching area, Residence
classrooms and Halls of Residences vi. Disciplinary probation
f. Having more than one share of food
g. Missing classes without permission/ good reasons
h. Taking visitors to Halls of Residence

_

Wanton movement of library books from their

proper areas

j. Littering college premises

k. Inappropriate dressing

1. Being found within the Halls of Residence of
opposite sex before the allowed time

m. Taking food for visitors

n. Taking food to the Halls of Residences

o. Taking food outside the dining hall without
permission.

p. Changing rooms in the Hall of Residence without
permission

q. Improper dressing as stipulated in this handbook

 

 

9.2.2 The College shall sanction a student for the following acts as serious offences:

 

Serious offence Disciplinary sanctions include,
but not limited to:

 

 

 

 

38


--- Page 39 ---
 

 

10.

11.
12.
13.
14.

15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.

21.

22.
23.

24.

Willful damage of college property

Use of obscene language

Posting of nasty comments, pictures, cartoons
and diagrams on the notice board and/or in the
social platform

Use of cell phones while in class, and examination
room

Possessing a smart device including a cell phone,
smartwatch, smartpen in the examination room
Getting drunk, incapacitated and display of
disorderly behavior

Unauthorized possession, distribution and/or
sharing of DCE protected documents-including
curriculum documents and policies

Selling of DCE protected documents-including
curriculum documents and policies

Organizing and managing public events without
the notice of the Principal

Having external trips without permission from
the Principal

Cheating before, during, and after examinations
Academic plagiarism

Repeated absenteeism from classes
Impersonation of officers at DCE or any other
institution with the aim of scamming or extorting
funds from unsuspecting individuals.

Putting the image of the College at disrepute
Theft

Rape

Forgery

Illegal strikes

Staying in the room of a student of the opposite
sex after 10 p.m.

Being found within the Halls of Residence of
opposite sex before the allowed time

Fighting on the campus

Causing bodily harm to members of staff and
fellow students

Having another student as a hostage for whatever
reason

 

iii.

Written reprimand and
serious warning
Suspension from use of
the Library for a period
of time as determined
by the Librarian or the
Library | Management
and/or
community service

Team

Suspension
Expulsion/ dismissal
from the College

Any student found

guilty of
damage of
arson or

malicious
property,
attempted
arson, or threat to life
and bodily harm shall
be suspended
immediately pending
disciplinary action.

 

39

 


--- Page 40 ---
 

 

25.

26.
27.
28.
29.
30.
31.
32.

33.

34,

35.

36.

37.

38.

39.

40.
41.
42.
43.

44.
45.
46.

47.

48.
49.

50.

Accommodating another person in the Halls of

Residence

Sexual harassment

Teasing

Bullying of any kind

Writing anonymous letters

Watching pornographic films at the College

Vandalism of property at/outside the campus

Taking furniture outside the classroom, dining

hall, and Halls of Residence

Bribery

Being involved in Alcohol and substance abuse

Insulting and or underrating staff, fellow

students, and the public

Giving information or holding press interviews

without permission from the Principal

Deliberately making false statements or

supplying false information

Any act resulting in the falsification or

misrepresentation of relevant information or an

attempt to interfere with disciplinary procedures

shall be considered a grave offense.

Failure to return college property when

suspended, withdrawn, dismissed or on
completion of course

Deliberately damaging property of fellow student

Found in possession of stolen property

Cooking in Halls of Residences

Failure to pay back for the damaged property

including debts

Transferring library tickets, meal coupons to

other users

Proven case of theft

Mutilation/ defacing library material(s)

Noise making and causing disturbance in the

Library

Eating, drinking in the library

Disruption of filing sequence of books on the

shelves

Moving equipment from one place to another

 

40

 

 


--- Page 41 ---
 

 

without the authority of the College Librarian
51. Infringement of internet rules

 

 

 

9.3 STUDENTS GRIEVANCE AND STRIKE AND DEMONSTRATION

9.3.1

9.3.2

9.3.3

9.3.4

9.3.5

9.3.6

Meetings of the general assembly shall be held in line with the Students Representative Council
Constitution and shall take place during day time to ensure that off-campus students are not
disadvantaged in their participation.

The Dean of students, the Registrar and Principal shall always be informed by the speaker and
the President of the Student Council at least 48 hours before the general assembly matters on the
agenda of such general assembly to allow Management address those matters.

Where the General Assembly resolves to stage a peaceful demonstration, the Students
Representative Council shall undertake such necessary steps as required by law for
holding peaceful demonstrations. The period for the demonstration shall not be indefinite and
shall be defined accordingly.

Where the issue for the peaceful demonstration concerns the College Management, the Students
Representative Council shall be required to engage the College Management in dialogue to
resolve the concerns. Where there is a deadlock with the College Management, Student
Representative Council shall inform the Principal and Registrar in writing regarding their next
course of action.

Any demonstration shall be within the Malawi’s Republican constitution, and must not block
streets, right of way, or sidewalks; jeopardize the safety of individuals, their property, or
integrity of the College or any other property; intimidate, harass, or threaten any fellow student,
any member of the College community or any member of the public.

If students stay off from classes for 72 hours due to demonstrations, Management shall close the
College.

9.4 Students’ property.

9.41
9.4.2

Each student is required to ensure the safety of their personal property
Any property left in any part of the premises of the College is at owner's risk.

41


--- Page 42 ---
9.4.3 Any student is at liberty to privately access any insurance policy.

9.4.4 The College shall not be responsible for the loss or damage by any means of students’ property.

42


--- Page 43 ---
SECTION 10
STUDENT’S DISCIPLINARY COMMITTEE

10.1There shall be an adhoc Students’ Disciplinary Committee which shall be responsible for
considering cases of misconduct and making recommendations to the Principal for a final
decision after hearing the student or students against whom misconduct is alleged.
10.2 A student shall appear before the disciplinary committee if they violate any of the College rules
and regulations.
10.3 The students’ Disciplinary committee shall comprise the following members:
i. The College Deputy Principal who shall be the Chairperson of the Committee.
ii. The Registrar shall be secretary of the committee.
iii. Director, Centre for Distance and Continuing Education.
iv. Dean of students.
v. All Deans of faculty.
vi. Head of the relevant Department/section in which the student misconduct has
occurred.
vii. | One co-opted staff member who would add value to the committee.
viii. | Two students representatives (female and male) nominated by SRC.

10.4 Procedure of students’ disciplinary committee
10.4.1 The quorum for meetings of the Students’ Disciplinary Committee shall be two thirds of
all the members of the committee including the Committee’s chairperson or his
appointee, Registrar and Dean of Students.
10.4.2 The Students’ Disciplinary Committee shall keep minutes of its meetings and a copy shall
be submitted to the Principal within 2 working days.

10.5 Rules and procedures in disciplinary proceeding

10.5.1 The Chairperson of the Students’ Disciplinary Committee shall regulate proceedings in a
manner as simple and informal as possible within the procedural regulations which is
best fitted to do substantial justice.

10.5.2 The Students’ Disciplinary Committee shall conduct all disciplinary hearings in
accordance with the principles of natural justice and shall more particularly ensure that
every student charged with misconduct or other breach of these regulations shall be:

10.5.2.1 Informed of the charge or charges that he/she has to answer and the details of the charge
or charges not less than three days before the commencement of the proceeding relating
to the charge or charges.

10.5.2.2 Furnished with a full and fair opportunity to respond to the allegations of misconduct or
breach of regulations as are made against him/ her.

10.5.2.3 Permitted to present any relevant facts or call any competent witnesses to testify on his/
her behalf.

43


--- Page 44 ---
10.5.2.4 Permitted to be present at all stages of the proceedings when the committee is
deliberating upon its decision on the matter.
10.5.2.5 Informed in writing of the verdict of the Principal on the charges and the reasons for
that verdict as soon as is practicable.
10.5.2.6 In cases whereby members of the Disciplinary Committee are differing on an
opinion, there shall be voting. Voting shall be by a secret ballot.
10.5.2.7 Recommendation of the disciplinary hearing shall be made based on a simple
majority vote of the committee.
10.5.2.8 The Secretary shall serve the student with a notice summoning him/her to appear
before the committee. The notice shall be contained in a letter addressed to him/her
and advising him/her of the hearing with respect to:
The place at which he/she is to attend the meeting.
The date and time provided that the date shall not be less than 3 days from the date of
such notice.
Particulars of the offence he/she has to answer.
His/her right to call a witness to attend and give any relevant testimony on his/ her
behalf before the committee.

10.5.2.9 A member of the committee, who has a close relationship with the accused shall, at
will, recuse himself or herself from participating in the Committee proceedings.

10.5.2.10 The Committee shall find a student to have breached the rules on either the
student’s own admission or when it has been proved so at the conclusion of the
hearing.

10.5.2.11 If the Committee determines that the student has violated the College rules,
regulations, procedures, policies, standards of conduct or orders, it shall then
determine the appropriate sanction to be imposed. When determining the appropriate
sanctions, the Committee shall review the evidence presented at the hearing,
circumstances leading to the conduct, gravity of the matter and the students past
record of conduct at the College.

10.5.2.12 No litigation shall be commenced with respect to matters that are under
consideration by the Students’ Disciplinary Committee.

10.5.2.13. Within 2 working days after the conclusion of a student's disciplinary Committee
hearing, the Chairperson shall submit to the Principal a full report that includes the
conclusions of the committee on whether the charges relating to the hearing are
proved and, where they are, recommendations on the penalty to be imposed on the
offending student.

10.5.2.14 The final decision of the Principal shall be communicated to the student and
subsequently to his/ her parent(s) or guardian(s). In cases whereby the student has
been dismissed, or suspended from College, a notice of the same shall be displayed
on the College’s notice board.

44


--- Page 45 ---
10.6 Provision for appeal

10.6.1

10.6.2

An aggrieved student may, within 3 weeks from the date of receiving the communication
of the final decision of the College, lodge their appeal for review of the decision of the
College with the Principal who shall set up an independent committee.

The decision of the Appeals Committee shall be final.

10.7 STUDENT DISCIPLINARY PENALTIES’.

10.7 + Any student of the College who commits acts of misconduct or otherwise contravenes any

College rule, regulation, procedure, policy, standard of conduct or orders may be liable to

one or more of the more serious disciplinary sanctions, but shall not be limited to the

following:

10.7.1

10.7.2
10.7.3

10.7.4

10.7.5

10.7.6

10.7.7

10.7.8

Warnings and reprimands: written reprimand and warning which include a statement
that continuation or repetition of the specific misconduct or other contravention will
result in one or more of the more serious disciplinary sanctions, including restitution,
suspension or dismissal. The warning or the reprimand shall be written by the Principal
to the Student.

Counselling: student shall undergo counselling process .

Restitution - financial or other compensation for damage or other loss of property and for
injury to persons or institutions.

Withdraw from Halls of Residence/ Eviction of the student from the Halls of Residence
for a designated period depending on the gravity of the offence.

Forfeiture: termination of any entitlement to scholarship or other award for a specific
period.

Suspension: Any student who is suspended shall be re-admitted at the end of their
suspension period which will be a minimum of one academic year.

Any student found guilty of malicious damage of property, arson or attempted arson,
threat to life and bodily harm by the students’ disciplinary committee shall be suspended
immediately pending further disciplinary action.

Dismissal: termination of student's enrolment in the College.

45


--- Page 46 ---
11.1.1

11.1.2

11.1.3

11.2.1

11.2.2

11.2.3

SECTION 11
GENERAL ACADEMIC RULES AND REGULATIONS
Assessment Rules and Grading Systems

The College shall provide students with the relevant academic assessment policy and the
grading system for the courses offered and for the program of study including the required
standard of performance for students to obtain particular awards.

The College specific information shall detail the following:

e Pass mark

e Classification of the award

e Rules for students to qualify for supplementary examinations, deferred examinations,
repeat courses or repeat the year, conditions for withdrawal on academic grounds and
any other referrals.

e Core and non-core courses, and whether compensatory passes are possible.

e The requirement to be met before proceeding to the next academic year.

A student who for no valid reasons fails to take an assessment or an examination shall be given a
mark of zero (0) for the assessment or examinations.

Deferred Examinations and Continuous Assessment

Deferred examinations are end of semester examinations which are arranged to a later date for a
particular candidate(s) who had missed the original examinations due to valid circumstances.

A student who misses examinations and/or continuous assessments with valid reason such as
illness, bereavement (death of a close relative), incapacitation or participation in important
national and/or international activities, shall be allowed to take deferred examination(s) or do
the missed continuous assessment (s) within three weeks after the administration of the original
examination(s) or continuous assessment (s).

A student who is unable to write an examination and or continuous assessments should apply in
writing for a deferred examination from the College Registrar. The student must receive formal
written approval from the Registrar before missing the examination.

A student shall be eligible for deferred examinations under the following circumstances:

a) Illness supported by valid medical evidence.
b) Bereavement due to loss of parents, guardians, children, spouse or siblings during the
examination period.
46


--- Page 47 ---
c) Incapacitation during examination period, supported by documented evidence from the
clinic.

d) Participation in important national and/or international activities, supported by documented
evidence of their participation.

11.2.4 Evidence of illness, incapacitation and participation should be given to the Registrar prior to the
examinations or assessments that will be missed.

11.2.5 Deferred examinations shall be administered before supplementary examinations so that the
student who fails and is eligible for supplementary examinations, will have a chance to write
supplementary examinations.

11.2.6 The posted grade earned during a deferred examination shall be the actual grade obtained at this
examination inclusive of marks from the continuous assessment.

11.2.7 A student who fails to sit for a deferred examination for a valid reason shall be permitted to sit
for another examination.

11.2.8 A student who for no valid reason fails to write a deferred examination shall be given a mark of
Zero (0) for this examination.

11.2.9 A student who is eligible for supplementary examinations will be required to do self-study and
make consultations where possible in preparation for the supplementary examination.

11.2.10 A student repeating a year shall repeat only a module(s) they failed in either of the semesters of
that academic year.

11.2.11 A student shall be allowed to repeat a year only once.

11.2.11 If a student repeating a year fails a module(s), he/she shall not be given a supplementary
examination, and will be withdrawn from the programme.

11.2.14 Students who fail Carry Over course(s) shall qualify for a repeat at the lower level without
option of a referral in the failed Carry Over provided that they do not simultaneously qualify for
a repeat or withdrawal in the main level of study.

11.2.15 Students who fail a Carry Over and qualify for another carryover in the main level of study shall
repeat the failed carryover course in the lower level and simultaneously register for the
carryover course in the main level. After passing both courses, they shall proceed to the next
level of study.

11.2.16 Students with carryover courses do not need to write continuous assessment in those course(s);
only end of semester examinations grade will be considered.

11.3. Examination appeals
47


--- Page 48 ---
11.3.1 A student is allowed to appeal against results within 21 days of release of the results

11.3.2 A student shall be required to pay an appropriate appeal fee or remark fee.

11.3.3. Any appeal against withdrawal on academic ground should be directed to the Principal who will

in turn direct it to the Appeals Committee.

11.3.4 There shall be a standing Appeals Committee which shall hear and decide on appeals against the

decision of the Senate to withdraw the student.

11.3.5 Students who wish to request that a particular grade be investigated or examination be remarked

should direct the request to the Principal who shall refer the matter to the relevant faculty.

11.3.6 The Head of Department or the Lecturer or his/her nominee affected by the appeal shall be

invited as witness.

11.3.7 The Appellant shall be heard on his/her appeal either orally or in writing and he/she shall bear

the cost of appearing for the purpose of being heard.
Assessment of performance

The method of assessment shall be made known to a student at the beginning of each course. The
manner in which the assessment is done may vary from one course to the other.

11.4.1 End of program assessment

End of program assessment is done in the final year of the programme and is based on the
cumulative grade point average (cGPA) for the last three years (year 2 to year 4) of the
programme.

11.4.2 Final award

11.4.2.1The final award for an undergraduate programme shall be classified as follows:

e PASS
e CREDIT
e DISTINCTION

The assessment guidelines provide details for qualification for each of the above three
classifications.

11.4.3. Publication of results

11.4.3.1The Registrar shall be responsible for the publication of the end of semester and end of year

examination results as approved by the Senate.

48


--- Page 49 ---
11.4.3.3 Students may access their detailed results through online access system using personal
passwords.

11.4.3.4 The results obtained by a candidate in any examination shall not be accessed unless and until
s/he has paid all fee balances.

11.5 Examination regulations
11.5.1 General rules

11.5.1.1 All candidates MUST have knowledge of the following;

(a) The rooms in which examinations are to be administered as indicated on the examination
timetable

(b) Examination commencement times as indicated on the examination timetable.

(c) That candidates will be admitted into the examination room 10 minutes before the start of

each examination session, and shall not be allowed to sit for examinations if they are late
by not more than 30 minutes.

11.5.2 Absence from the Examination

11.5.2.1 If a candidate fails to take an examination for no valid reason, deferred papers will not be
administered and a candidate will be awarded a failure grade.

11.5.2.2 Losing, misreading or failure to consult the examination time table, are not valid reasons for
absence or late arrival for the examination.

11.5.2.3 In case of absence from an examination through ill health, the candidate must submit a relevant
medical certification which must relate to the day/period of the examination. Such evidence
must be submitted to the Registrar’s office before the exam.

11.5.2.4 It is the responsibility of the candidate to arrange with his/her medical personnel for any
medical evidence to be sent to the Registrar's office.

11.5.3 Failing a course

11.5.3.1 A student shall be deemed to have failed a course if he or she obtains a grade below C- in
that course. The student who absent him or herself from an assessment session (test
examinations practicals, etc) in any course without a valid reason shall get a zero.

49


--- Page 50 ---
11.5.4 Misconduct

11.5.4.1 The following will be construed as acts of misconduct in an examination:

(a)

(b)
()

(d)
(e)

0)
(k)

Coming into the examination room with, or possessing in that room any unauthorized
materials.

Aiding, attempting to aid, obtaining/ attempting to obtain aid from another candidate.

Consulting, trying to consult any book/notes/unauthorized materials during an
examination.

Attempting to influence the examiner/ invigilator for an examination favour.

Impersonating another candidate/allowing oneself to be impersonated during
examinations.

Going out/visiting lavatories during the examination, except where there is a medical
evidence.

Chewing or swallowing a paper.

Possessing an electronic gadget, such as mobile phone, smart watch, smart pen, etc in an
examination.

Having any marks or inscriptions related to the examination on any part of the body or
garments prior to or during the examination

Failure to comply with Invigilator’s orders.

Coming to an examination room intoxicated.

11.5.5 Penalties for Infringement of Examination Regulations

All candidates MUST read the examination rules and regulations. The following steps will be

taken to impose penalties on any candidate who infringes upon the examination regulations:

11.5.5.1 Any candidate who is noted by the invigilator to be committing an infringement of the
regulations will be reported and appropriate action be taken.

11.5.5.2 In all cases of misconduct, the candidate will be informed that his/her conduct will be reported
and that the decision as to whether the work will be accepted or disciplinary action taken rests
with the authorities.

50


--- Page 51 ---
NOTE: In the case of CHEATING, EXPULSION from the institution will be MANDATORY. In
this context,” examination” will be taken to include all final examinations, terminal and any
other examinations taken during the year.

11.5.5.3 A candidate who wishes to appeal shall follow the procedure set out in the appeals procedures.
11.6 Examination remark.

11.6.1 Students may request for a remark of an exam within four weeks after the release of exam
results.

11.6.2 Students may request for a remark of an exam after receiving marks that he or she is not satisfied
with after payment of a remark fee to be revised from time to time.

11.6.3 The results of a remark are communicated from the office of the registrar through SARIS and the
results maybe positive or negative which means the student will have to abide by the academic
decision made.

11.7 Deadlines for assignments
11.7.1 Assignments shall be handed in on due dates.

11.7.2 Any student who misses the deadline for submitting an assignment shall be given a grade of
zero for non-submission

11.8 Reading week

11.8.1 A reading week free of normal classes shall be provided to students prior to sitting for end of
semester examinations. During this week, students shall be required to be around the campus to
review the academic work covered in the semester and prepare for the examinations.

11.8.2 Any students who will be absent from the campus during the reading week shall be deemed to
have violated the rules of class attendance hence liable to disciplinary action.

11.8.3 There shall be no classes or any form of assessment during the reading week

11.8.4 During this week and to the end of examinations, all student organized meetings; secular clubs
and societies, sporting activities, field trips, shows, public lectures shall not be permitted.
However, religious gatherings shall be allowed up to 19:00hrs.

51


--- Page 52 ---
SECTION 12

CONDITIONS FOR WITHDRAWAL OTHER THAN ACADEMIC AND MISCONDUCT
AND THE RE-ADMISSION PROCESS

12.1 A student is deemed to have withdrawn when he/she is absent from lectures for a
period of more than two weeks.

12.2 The College may permit a student to withdraw for up to one academic year only, on the
following grounds, and taking into consideration the merits of each particular case and
the maximum duration of the programme:

12.2.1 Pregnancy

12.2.1.1 Any student of the College who becomes pregnant in the course of her studies shall
report the pregnancy to the Dean of Students or Warden who may advise about
medical check-ups and counselling if necessary.

12.2.1.2 A pregnant student who opts to use medical services for her check-ups other than those
provided at the Campus shall inform the Dean of Students or Warden.

12.2.1.3 A student who becomes pregnant in the course of her programme shall be allowed to
continue with her studies provided she is certified by a registered medical practitioner
to be fit for the activities required by the academic programme.

12.2.1.4 A pregnant student should plan her withdrawal from the College in line with
recommendations she receives from the Medical personnel based on the medical check-
ups. She shall in any case withdraw from the campus’ Halls of Residence at least four
weeks before the expected date of delivery.

12.2.1.5 Where there is a miscarriage or the baby is still born, a student will be allowed to return
to her studies as soon as her health is certified as satisfactory in a medical report issued
by a certified medical practitioner.

12.2.2 Illness:

12.2.2.1 Any student of the College may withdraw on medical grounds only if the Hospital or a
medical doctor has certified that they are unfit to continue with their studies for the
time being.

12.2.3 Financial withdrawal:
12.2.3.1 Any student of the College may withdraw on not more than one occasion during the

course of the programme for which he/she is registered on financial grounds if such
withdrawal is approved by the Principal.

52


--- Page 53 ---
12.2.4 Voluntary withdrawal.

12.2.4.1 Any student of the College who withdraws for no valid reasons or contrary to the
provisions of these Regulations shall be deemed to have withdrawn voluntarily and
shall be de-registered as a student of the College.

12.3 Re-admission of students

12.3.1 Every student who is permitted to withdraw from the College shall apply for re-
admission to the Registrar before resuming the programme for which he/she was
registered prior to the withdrawal and shall not resume such programme without the
approval of the Principal through the office of the College Registrar.

53


--- Page 54 ---
13.1.2

13.1.3

13.1.4

13.1.5

13.1.6

13.2.1

13.2.2

13.2.3

13.2.4

13.2.5

SECTION 13
STUDENT REPRESENTATIVE COUCIL AND SOCIETIES
Students Representative Council

The College shall have a Student Council known as the Domasi College of Education
Student Representative Council. The students’ life at the College is partly regulated
by the Student’s Representative Council.

Every registered student of the College shall be a member of the Students
Representative Council and shall pay the applicable subscription fee.

Election of the office bearers for the Students Representative Council shall be
conducted in consultation with the Dean of Students.

The President and Vice President assisted by the Speaker shall head the Council.

The Students Representative Council shall also have directors as the Constitution
may provide that head some aspects of students’ social activities such as academic,
welfare, sports, entertainment, special needs, treasury, publications and secretariat.
All positions in the Council are democratically filled through elections.

Only students with no indisciplinary record shall be allowed to contest for positions
in the Students Representative Council.

Clubs and Societies

Every student or group of students of the College shall have the right to join any
registered club, society or organization of their choice.

No club, society, association or organization of the students shall be established or
operate in the College without being affiliated to the Students’ Council. The club,
society, association or organization shall, upon being vetted by the Students Council,
register with the registrar through the Dean of Students indicating to him/her the
objectives of the group.

Students shall not be allowed to host political functions on campus during working
days.

Every student club, society, association or organization shall have a Patron who shall
be any member of staff approved by the Principal.

No club, society, association or organization shall be established, operate in the
College or obtain funds from the Students Representative Council or other source

54


--- Page 55 ---
13.2.6

13.2.7

13.2.8

13.2.9

13.3.1

13.3.2

13.3.3

13.3.4

13.3.5

13.3.6

13.3.7

unless the Registrar is satisfied that the club, society, association or organization
exists for a lawful cause and has complied with the requirements of these Regulations
regarding the registration of students groups.

Any group of students to organize a social event on or outside College campus must
register the event with the Registrar and provide the name of the student group
responsible for organizing the event.

Any group of students that intends to organize a social event outside the campus of
the College must seek prior permission for such event from the Registrar through a
written application submitted to the Registrar through the Patron of the group and
through Dean of Students.

The Patron of any group, who submits an application for permission for the group
to organize a social event outside the campus of the College shall report any case of
student misconduct during the event to the Dean of Students.

Members of any group of students that is permitted to organize a social event outside
the campus of the College shall be accompanied, to the event, by the Patron of the

group.
Sports and Recreation

Sporting activities in the College hall be coordinated through the office of the Sports
Administrator. In absence of a full-time employee, the College may engage a part-
time staff to coordinate sporting activities.

College students shall be encouraged to participate in various kinds of sporting
activities and games such as athletics, acrobatics, aerobics, fitness exercises, football,
basketball, volleyball, netball, squash, tennis, chess, arts, etc.

Last period of every Friday shall be designated for sports.

The Students Council’s Director of Sports shall assist in identifying sporting
disciplines in which students are interested to participate.

The Sports Administrator will work with the Students Council’s Director of Sports to
make provision for appropriate facilities and equipment for student participation.

Where the College does not have its own facilities, efforts will be made to enter into
agreement with neighbouring institutions with such facilities for students’ use.

Students are encouraged to participate in sporting activities as part of their physical,
mental and intellectual well-being.

55


--- Page 56 ---
13.3.8

13.4.1

13.4.2

13.4.3

13.4.4

13.4.5

13.5.1

13.5.2

The College shall support internal sporting events through annual sponsorships such
as Principal’s trophies which shall be organized in liaison between Management and
the Students Council; and through supporting competition with other educational
institutions and teams. Harmony shall be expected and respected in all disciplines.

Entertainment

All entertainment activities shall be done after seeking the approval of the College
Principal.

The Dean of Students shall work with the Students Council’s Entertainment Director
on matters regarding entertainment.

On entertainment, students are free to engage in various forms of entertainment,
bearing in mind the values of Domasi College of Education.

All entertainment activities shall end not later than 12 midnight. Thereafter, students
are required to retire to their respective Halls of Residence.

The calendar of events regarding all sporting activities, entertainment, social and
religious events shall be planned in advance for the semester and shall be subject to
approval by the Principal through the Dean of Students.

Clearance

Every student shall complete and submit a clearance form at the end of each
academic year, and every student who, without reasonable cause, fails to submit a
clearance form shall have their results withheld.

Every student shall settle in full all his or her debts with the College and the Students
Council at the end of each academic year. Any student with outstanding College
debts shall not be informed of his/ her results.

56


--- Page 57 ---
SECTION 14
EXTRA-CURRICULAR ACTIVITIES

14.1. DCE shall require its students to be involve in extracurricular activities for their
all-round personal development.

14.2. Extracurricular activities shall have designated time other than normal class time
in which students shall adhere to.

14.3 Permission for any extracurricular activities that are supposed to take place
outside DCE campus shall be sort from relevant staff members through the Dean
of Student and the relevant Student Representative Council portfolio
representative shall be responsible for asking for the permission and ensuring
that all necessary preparations are done timely and in the right manner.

SECTION 15

15.0 AMENDMENTS TO COLLEGE RULES AND REGULATIONS

Student rules and regulations may be amended from time to time at the
discretion of the College Management. However, once rules and regulations
have been amended, the students’ body shall be informed accordingly
through proper channels.

16.0 SUMMARY

Domasi College of Education endeavours to meet the growing needs of the Nation by
offering quality teacher education and continuing professional development.
Consequently, it shall make a positive contribution to national development by
inculcating in students attributes necessary for social and economic growth, and for
making education a life-long activity. It is in this vein that the students’ rules and
regulations have been put in place to provide a conducive learning environment for
all students.

57


--- Page 58 ---
REFERENCES
University of Malawi (2011) student handbook.
Domasi College of education student handbook revised 2017

Nalikule College of Education (2018) Student handbook

58


